Welcome to this course on Digital Signal Processing
being taught by me. My name is S.C. Dutta

Roy and I am an emeritus professor here. This
is the first lecture in which we are going

to introduce Digital Signal Processing in
general and the course in particular.

Is the course content readable on the screen?
It is okay. I shall read it out. The course

contents are given in the sheet that I have
circulated. This is the span of the course.

Let me tell you I do not expect any prior
knowledge of DSP from you. All I assume is

that you are acquainted with signals and systems.

However, at least one third of the course
shall be devoted to a review of signals and

systems because it is extremely important
that you understand discrete time signals

and discrete time systems and what happens
when discrete time signals interact with discrete

time systems. The first two topics are: review
of signals and systems and discrete time signals

and systems in the time domain. We shall discuss
typical signals. We shall go into the sampling

process and then we shall characterize discrete
time systems. We shall then introduce the

special class of linear time invariant systems
which I abbreviate as LTI and discuss classification

of LTI discrete time systems. This will be
followed by discrete time signals description

or characterization in the frequency domain
through various kinds of transforms and we

shall introduce the discrete time Fourier
transform and Discrete Fourier Transform,

abbreviated as DFT.

We shall talk about the computation of DFT;
in other words, we shall go into the basics

of FFT. We shall talk about linear convolution
using DFT and also circular convolution using

DFT. Then we shall introduce some new techniques
which are not available in the book. We shall

introduce Z-transforms in detail and their
application in characterizing linear time

invariant discrete time systems i.e. system
description in the frequency domain. In other

words, we shall talk about transfer functions
and frequency response. Then we shall introduce

simple digital filters, all-pass functions,
complementary transfer functions and then

digital two-pairs.

We shall go back to sampling and reconstruction
and have a small discussion on that. Then

will go into digital filter structures that
are direct, parallel, cascade, ladder and

lattice for Infinite Impulse Response (IIR)
filters and possible realizations for FIR

or Finite Impulse Response filters, including
poly phase. All-pass structures and tunable

filters will follow this. We shall spend a
considerable amount of time on digital filter

design: infinite impulse response using impulse
invariant and bilinear transformations, and

finite impulse response filters using windowing
and frequency response sampling techniques.

A short discussion on computer aided design
will also be included.

We shall discuss spectral transformations
for IIR design. If time permits, we shall

also have a brief discussion on implementation
considerations. This is what we aim to cover(?).

At IITs, we do not cover a course; we uncover
at least certain parts of the course. This

is the aim and it does not matter how much
we can do, but what we do must get imprinted

in your mind.

The books to consult: I have adapted S. K.
Mitra, Digital Signal Processing - a computational

approach, McGraw Hill 2000. This is the second
edition; I would advice you to buy the third

edition, which is available. A 4th edition
is also due to be published. There are major

changes which were effected by Professor Mitra
in the later editions at the suggestions of

a few people, including me.

Those who have difficulty with signals and
systems are advised to buy a copy of 

Oppenheim and Schafer, "Discrete Time Signal
Processing." This is a Prentice Hall publication,

2000. This is about what we wish to do in
the course.

Since the topic is digital signal processing
we shall explain the meaning of the individual

terms and then what the combination means.
First we concentrate on what is a signal.

These are formal definitions and you must
understand them very clearly.

A signal in mathematical terms is a function.
A function is a dependent variable of some

variables which are independent variables.
The number of independent variables can be

one or more.

In general, a signal is a function of several
variables. These variables are x1, x2, x3

and so on. These variables, for example could
be time, distance, temperature or any other

physical parameter. In this course we shall
mostly be concerned with a function of a single

variable and that variable will be time. But
because we are talking of digital signal processing,

time shall also lose its significance.

Our functions will be functions of numbers
and numbers are also restricted to be integers.

In other words, in DSP the type of signal
that we shall be concerned with are functions

of a variable n, where n can take only integer
values that are positive or negative. n can

be -- 15 or it can be 0 or + 13 or + 14, but
n = 13.5 is not permitted because time is

discretized.

If we plot this function or signal versus
the variables, the resulting plot is called

a waveform. If the function has only one variable,
then a two dimensional picture in a graph

paper suffices. The ordinary sinusoidal waveform
that you draw on paper is a one dimensional

signal and this is called a waveform. In general
the waveform can be multidimensional, depending

on the number of independent variables.

For example, a picture, which is said to be
worth more than 1000 words, has two dimensions.

A picture should ideally be three dimensional,
because it has three space variables. Dependent

variable in an image can be brightness, color,
density or it can be any other thing.

So signals can be one dimensional, two dimensional
or multi-dimensional. However, we shall be

concerned only with one dimensional signal
that is f (n). Signals can be natural, for

example a thunderstorm or a lightning which
are natural phenomena or it can be synthetic.

Signals can be generated in the laboratory
for communication purposes. Signals can be

either analog or discrete. It is the discrete
type signals that we are concerned with in

this course.

One common confusion is that all continuous
signals are also called analog signals. All

continuous time signals are analog signals
but all analog signals are not continuous

time. If the time is discretized but not the
amplitude, i.e. If the independent variable

is discretized but not the dependent variable,
then it is still an analog signal.

Therefore an analog signal 
can be either continuous time or discrete

time. Discrete time signals are also analog
signals. If a discrete time signal is quantized,

that is, if in a discrete time signal where
the independent variable has been discretized,

the amplitude is also discretized, i.e. which
is allowed to take on only certain specific

values, then it is said to be discretized
or quantized. So if a discrete time signal

passes through A (analog) to D (digital) converter
then depending on the number q of bits, 2

to the power q discrete amplitudes are possible;
for example, a three bit A to D converter

gives 8 possible amplitudes.

After A to D conversion, the signal is also
coded in some form and the most usual form

is the binary form. After discretization,
the signal becomes a binary number and that

is what we call a 
digital signal. I repeat here that analog

and continuous time signals are not one and
the same.

As I have said earlier all continuous time
signals are analog signals, but all analog

signals are not continuous time. Analog signals
can be continuous time and also discrete time.

If the discretization is limited to the independent
variable or the x axis only, the signal still

remains analog. The digital signal can be
obtained only when both the independent and

dependent variables are discretized. A discrete
time signal is analog and a digital signal

is one in which the amplitude is also discretized.
Why should we study signals at all? We study

about signals because they carry information.
It is information that drives the whole world,

the basic steps being generation, transmission,
reception, absorption, and action on the basis

of information.

Information is the basic thread of life and
therefore we are interested in signals. Why

processing? What is the need for processing?
Processing is done to obtain the given signal

in a more desirable form. For example, if
there are a number of signals which are to

be transmitted over the same channel, then
we do a processing called multiplexing. At

the receiver end the signals have to be separated
and therefore there is a need for de-multiplexing.

Invariably the signal is corrupted by noise.
Therefore our processing may aim at filtering

the noise out. I shall illustrate this with
the help of a specific case, viz. the electrocardiogram

(ECG) waveform.

Electrocardiogram waveform usually looks like
this. If you take one cycle and blow it up,

it will look like this. Doctors are interested
where the peaks and dips occur. The standard

language used by doctors for them are PQRST.
This is a very clean trace that you see here.

If this signal is corrupted, the PQRST points
may be blurred and difficult to detect.

For example, the ECG waveform is usually corrupted
with 50 Hertz Power Line Pick Up. The ever

present power, 230 volts 50 Hertz can be induced
from any nearby equipment. It can be a magnetic

pick up or it can be an electrostatic pick
up. It can be due to mutual capacitance or

mutual inductance. This is ever present and
you may like to get rid of the 50 Hertz before

you look at the signal. This is done by a
notch filter or a band elimination filter

which we shall study in this course.

There are also Electromyographic (EMG) signals
due to the muscles. The human body is a wonderful

electrical machine. If you put two electrodes
at any two places of body, it will record

an electric potential. The muscles themselves
generate electrical signals and they might

corrupt the ECG signal. Hence there is a need
for processing to get a clean picture.

Signal processing basically can be done in
three ways: one is analog, that is, do not

convert the signal into digital and process
it in the analog format itself. The other

two are digital processing and mixed signal
processing, which is partly analog and partly

digital. One might ask here: what is wrong
with totally analog processing?

Well, the answer to that is given by the proverb
two arrows in a quiver is always better than

one, because if one fails, you can use the
other arrow to hit the enemy. But then why

three? It is three because digital signal
processing is so much more convenient and

so much more accurate than analog, while most
of the natural signals that we generate in

the laboratory for communication are analog.
Therefore you have to use mixed processing.

Analog signal processing dominated the field
prior to 1970's but after 1970 because of

the easy availability of digital hardware
in the form of integrated circuit chips at

a very low cost, digital signal processing
got boosted up.

The current practice is mixed signal processing,
dominated by digital signal processing. In

other words at any point in the signal processing
chain if you find that DSP can be used, you

go ahead without thinking about any other
choice. Analog signal processing advanced

in quantum jumps with the inventions of new
devices and circuits.

We started with Acharya J.C. Bose's coherer
and spark gaps. Spark gaps were used to generate

signals and coherer, a galena crystal was
used to detect signals.

Coherer is a unipolar device and is a crude
form of a diode as we know it now. That was

what we started with. Marconi's patent on
telegraph signals also used a kind of spark

gaps with ON/OFF control. He also used an
improved form of coherer to detect signals.

Then vacuum tubes came in the picture, triode
in particular, which could amplify a weak

signal. Then in 1947 transistors came in the
picture which made things smaller and made

life simpler because circuits were more designable
with smaller power supplies. A 5 volt or 12

volt power supply does the job.

Further reduction in size was made possible
due to the introduction of operational amplifiers

and other integrated circuits, analog as well
as digital. Then there occurred this revolution

of small scale integrated circuits, medium
scale integrated circuits, large scale integrated

circuits and finally VLSI, SSI etc. In fact,
IC's are only limited by ones imagination

as to how much can you go. However, even today,
advances in analog signal processing are going

in full swing because most signals of interest
are analog. The real life signals like the

speech, music etc, are analog. The ultimate
desired output in most cases is also analog.

Digital telephony has come in. You can process
speech digitally and transmit digitally but

ultimately you cannot hear 1s and 0s; you
have to convert into analog signal. Therefore

analog signal processing is also advancing
and there is a lot of research that is going

on. Mixed signal processing is the trend of

the day.


